 Welcome to another walkthrough for Computer Architecture for Everybody.
 In this, I want to do an assignment.
 And so, sometimes when you launch this, you will have an assignment.
 And that assignment will be auto-graded.
 So we're going to build a simple AND gate circuit with two inputs and one output.
 So let's go ahead and do that. Let's place an AND gate.
 Oh, no. Let's turn on the command and let's use, let's say, place AND.
 And then say, place input, place input.
 So we got some inputs. I don't remember the syntax to connect them.
 So we got, I'm going to move them around and make them line up a little bit.
 I'm going to connect the inputs to the, the two inputs to the AND gate.
 And then I'm going to place an output, put the output here.
 And then we'll test to see. Oh, come on. Connect.
 There we go. Now it's connected.
 Okay. So we've got our AND gate working.
 0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1. And it's a 1. Okay.
 So let's go ahead and do the auto-grader.
 So we haven't done everything yet. It gives you a truth table.
 So we can say, start grading. And it's going to say, ooh, it's looking for input labeled A.
 I found inputs 1 and input 2. Please use the tag tool to label your inputs.
 Okay. And so we are going to do that.
 We're going to use the tag tool to call this one input A.
 Okay. And we're going to use the tag tool to mention this one is B.
 This is a pretty simple assignment. And let's still make a mistake.
 We got to connect the output to Q, but let's just, let's start the grading.
 Missing output label Q. Fix that, fix it with the tag tool.
 So we'll go ahead and call this Q.
 And then you can see it's going to auto-grade, and this time it's going to hopefully work.
 So it says, okay, we found all the required components.
 All required components are properly labeled A, B, and Q.
 Then it says it's got it. We got an AND gate. That's cool.
 So let's just see if 0, A of 0, B of 0 results in an output of 0, and it does.
 Let's try an A of 0 and B of 1. Does it, does it cruise an output of 0? Yes, it does.
 And does it, an A of 1 and B of 0 produce a 0? Yes, it does.
 And the last test is the 1 and the 1, and it gives us an AND,
 and sends great back to the learning management system.
 So I hope you found this useful. Cheers.
