 Hello, and welcome to another walkthrough for Computer Architecture for Everybody.
 In the previous walkthrough, we went through a simple sort of WAT/WASM situation where we're
 talking to JavaScript. This is not really C code. It's hello world, but it's not C code. This is
 WASM plus being run in a JavaScript context, and the hello world is coming out of a console log
 function in JavaScript. I want to shift gears a little bit, focusing still again on hello world,
 and show you something for another one of my classes, C Programming for Everybody,
 under the write C option. So in this course, I have a C auto grader. Right now I'm just using
 the playground. You can write C programs and then compile them. So let's go ahead and write our C
 program. Now I'm going to hit the run code here, and you'll see a little spinner going on, and
 there's a bunch of work. And if you do the view source and you watch the network, I'm not going
 to show you the whole network. What you'll see is this C code is being sent up to the CC4E server
 using a piece of software called Emscripten, which compiles C code and other things into WASM. Then
 this environment will download the WASM, and I've got it watching for a string WASM in the
 network requests, and it will download that WASM, and then it will execute the WASM,
 and it will put the output here. I mean, I already executed it, but I made a change,
 hello world exclamation. So in the next click, it is going to compile it, compile to WASM
 inside the server, download the WASM back into the browser, and then execute the WASM in JavaScript.
 So it's going to be sort of boring, it's just going to work. But watch for the spinner in the
 middle here. There goes, to see the spinner was there for just like a quarter of a second.
 I ought to slow it down. But it did that, and there is this a.out WASM. And if we take a look
 at the response, yeah, it's not going to show it to us because it's kind of binary stuff, okay? So
 that was the WASM that came back. Now, that WASM executed with a JavaScript framework to start that
 WASM up, and then it printed hello world. Now, standard io.h is in C, printf is in the C standard
 library. So what has Inscriptium done? Well, what Inscriptium has done is it has compiled
 all of the standard libraries into WASM. It has compiled our code into WASM. It's linked it all
 together and sent down a really big WASM because this #include, if you know C, it just pulls a
 file in. And so that got compiled into WASM too. So let's take a look at how much WASM really came
 down. So let's take a look here. This is a dump of the WASM for hello world. And there's a lot here,
 but it's not that much, right? We got, let's see, 3C00 hex. I don't know how big that is,
 but I just scrolled through the whole thing. But this is not just my hello world code.
 This is hello world plus some of the standard library and some of the standard io.h, all compiled
 into WASM. Now, this now is self-contained as WASM code ready to run inside of the browser. And
 that's of course what happened when it ran in the browser and out came hello world. But there's a
 lot to it because we're pulling in the C libraries and converting them to WASM as well. So this is
 kind of an ugly version of it. We can take a look at a little prettier version of it by looking at,
 not much prettier, we can look at the WAT. And so we're looking at the WAT here. This was written
 to be readable. This is the WAT code editor for the hello world. That's a pure WASM JavaScript
 example and you can kind of read it and you'll change it in your auto grader in a bit. This is
 more like what WASM does because it ran the in script and compiler and produced the WASM. And
 then I converted the WASM to WAT so that we could see it. And we're not going to change this. There's
 all kinds of stuff. FD write, FD close, FD seek. That's part of the standard library. And you see
 it's really like busy stuff. It's calling things and setting parameters and pushing them on the
 stack and calling them and making functions. And do we have any loops here? Let's see if we can get
 to a loop. There's a block. There's some blocks. There's some loops and jumps and all kinds of
 stuff. This is the output of a compiler that is writing to a pseudo machine language in WAT. So
 I'll just scroll through this. That is a lot of WAT. And it's not very easy to see. But
 it's pretty yummy and delicious to the runtime environment in JavaScript who has built an
 interpreter, much like the interpreter we built for the CDC 6504. And it runs that as the
 interpreter. So the key thing is that I'm not going to spend a lot of time having you kind
 of learn to code WAT. It's not intended for you to code it. It's intended for compilers to produce
 it. So just imagine that this C program that we're writing is really like a high performance,
 maybe a video game shading library or something that would get compiled into WASM, which would
 be super high performant. And then that WASM might be recompiled into raw machine language
 by my browser. And then it'd be like super fast in the browser. And that's the whole,
 that's literally the whole point of WASM. The WASM is to make it so you can write
 approaching machine code speed code in a portable, safe, sandboxed way,
 running in the browser under the rules of JavaScript. And inside that browser,
 you can mix code from many sources and many trust domains. And they can't harm each other
 because they're all running in individualized sandboxes. Okay. So I hope that was a bit
 interesting about how we connect C programming and WASM and how I use it in my C programming
 for everybody course. Cheers.
