 - Hello, and welcome to our lecture
 on continuous analog computing.
 So there's a lot of things I'm going to show you.
 They don't matter too much
 because the real overall theme here is
 continuous means that these are devices
 that have sort of knobs or gears or sliders
 that use physical movement to approximate a computation.
 The key to these devices,
 like this device we'll play with in a little bit,
 is the carefully printed scales that are on these devices.
 Because as you move them, you are reading from the scales,
 you're inputting data into them using the scales
 and you're taking data out of them using the scales.
 And so that's a critical element of these,
 is that the scales are very, very carefully calibrated
 and built.
 But then once you've got those scales,
 the device is pretty simple to operate.
 That's the basic idea.
 Now the oldest known continuous analog computer
 is the Antikythera mechanism.
 It was found in a shipwreck around Greece
 near an island called Antikythera.
 And it uses gears to model the known solar system.
 It can model the sun and the moon and the earth,
 Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.
 And it doesn't just think of it as 24 hours a day,
 365 days a year.
 That actually is just a simplification.
 That's why we have leap years.
 It can model the more complex cycles
 where 19 year cycles and a 76 year cycle and a 223 cycle.
 And a lot of people want to think of this thing
 as quite mystical, like holy mackerel.
 People build a computer this long ago.
 And it turns out it's not that all complex.
 But it had this idea of such an early, such a precise device,
 so much data, solar, star, and planet observation
 that went into this, that it really
 has this air of mystery and mysticism about it.
 And this led to a movie called "Indiana Jones
 and the Dial of Destiny."
 And the basic idea was, is that in addition to the 24/7, 365
 cycle, there's an even longer cycle.
 And at some point, this dial of destiny,
 which is an Antikythera mechanism,
 will predict when a time portal will open and close.
 So you can go back in time sort of for one 24 hour period.
 And that's pretty fun.
 And I love the movie, and I love the Antikythera mechanism.
 They've made replicas of the Antikythera mechanism
 in various museums.
 But here's the interesting thing.
 They're not very mystical at all,
 because you can buy one on Amazon.
 And I did.
 So here is a cheap imitation Antikythera mechanism.
 And you can see here that it has gears,
 and it has very careful scales.
 It's got these scales for both the sun scale and the moon
 scale, so that the phases of the moon,
 whether it's a full moon, a new moon, et cetera.
 And so the idea is, the sizes of these gears
 is carefully calculated by the data in the solar system.
 And when you spin it around, there we go,
 you can see that the gears are keeping everything in control.
 And you can then stop and then read.
 So we're now in the middle of summer,
 and it's a particular day, and the moon
 is in a particular spot.
 And so that is a very simple Antikythera mechanism.
 Now, ironically, the way I'm holding this,
 we have this simple notion that we were taught in school
 about the solar system, that it says flat plane, like this.
 And all the planets are kind of in one plane.
 But it's not true, because it just turns out
 that the whole sun is moving.
 So it's like the sun is moving through the Milky Way.
 And I don't know if I got that very well, but there you go.
 The sun is moving through the Milky Way.
 So I couldn't get licensing for a really good video of this,
 but there are some really pretty videos called--
 you can go search or look for AI.
 Tell me about the actual motion of the Earth
 through the Milky Way galaxy.
 Oh, and by the way, the notion that the sun
 was the thing around which everything was rotating,
 the heliocentrism, got Nicholas Copernicus in trouble in 1543.
 And you can Google that as well.
 Now, I want to talk a little bit about modern, continuous analog
 devices.
 One's not quite so modern.
 It's been replaced by the hand calculator,
 which is the slide rule.
 And the other is a wind calculator for airplane pilots
 that uses a circular calculator to do trigonometry
 and Pythagorean theorem, mostly to compensate for wind
 direction on an airplane.
 We'll talk about both of them.
 So let's start talking about a slide rule.
 So a slide rule is a device.
 Again, all analog continuous devices have a scale on them.
 And this is a really tiny, very fine, highly accurate scale
 that maps numbers to their corresponding logarithm.
 So you could think of this entire device
 as a function mapping x to log x.
 And then what you do is you move this back and forth.
 And you can affect doing addition and subtraction.
 And then you can add logarithms.
 And that's the same as multiplying and subtracting
 logarithms is the same as dividing,
 as long as you can keep track of the exponent.
 And so if you go back in the '50s and the '60s,
 or if you watch the movie Hidden Figures,
 you will see that everyone is carrying around a slide rule.
 And when I watched that movie Hidden Figures,
 I absolutely loved that detail of everyone
 having a slide rule, because that's really
 what it was like to be an engineer back in those times,
 because we didn't have hand calculators.
 All we had was a slide rule to do our multiplication for you.
 And I built an online slide rule that you can play with.
 So the next thing I want to talk about
 is computing wind correction in an airplane.
 So if you take an airplane, it spins a propeller,
 and it goes through the sky at a certain speed.
 And you can point it in any direction you want,
 and then you go up and you fly for a while,
 point it wherever you want, and then you come back down.
 And if you know the distance and you know the speed,
 you can figure out about how long
 it's going to take an hour and 15 minutes to get there.
 But there's a problem.
 There's wind.
 So let's just say I want to fly this little airplane
 from me to you.
 Let me grab it better.
 I want to fly this airplane from me to you.
 And you're 100 miles away-ish,
 and it's going to take me an hour to get to you.
 But what if there is a wind
 that's coming from this direction, okay?
 So the problem is, if I aim at you,
 the wind is just going to push me,
 and I'm not going to get to you.
 And not only it'll take me more than an hour,
 because the wind is actually not just moving me,
 but slowing me down.
 So when that hour is done,
 I will not be where you're at.
 I'll be lost.
 And so a big part of teaching us pilots
 is to know how to adjust what we call the crab angle,
 which is to aim the airplane
 in a different direction than we want to go
 to compensate for the wind that's pushing us.
 For our airplane goes 100 knots,
 which is like roughly miles per hour,
 and we want to go west 270 degrees,
 and the wind is out of 300 degrees at 15 knots.
 If we fly west, the wind will both slow us down.
 So where should we actually point the plane
 to actually have a ground track that is west,
 and what is our effective speed
 so we can calculate how long it's going to take us
 to get there, okay?
 So one way to do this is the law of signs.
 Everybody knows the law of signs.
 The law of signs says that the ratio
 of the sign of an angle to the sign,
 the length of the side opposite that angle
 is the same for triangles, most triangles.
 Turns out if the angles get too big or too small,
 you've got to kind of transform a little bit.
 So it's not too easy.
 But there is math that tells you
 how to calculate this effect of wind on an airplane,
 both in terms of changing ground speed
 and direction you have to go.
 And so you'll see we have a headwind, the first one,
 where the wind is coming from our right and in front of us.
 Then we have a side wind
 where it's just coming from our right.
 And then we have a tailwind
 which is coming from our right and behind us.
 And you have to calculate all those things
 because your plane may speed up or slow down
 and it might affect where you have to point the plane.
 And I provide there some simple,
 beautiful mathematics in Python.
 And it's actually more complex than that
 because not every triangle works this way.
 And so you have to adjust your triangle sometimes.
 So our airplane goes west and we want to go 270 degrees.
 The wind is out of the Northwest at 300 degrees and 15 knots.
 The answer is we're going to fly a heading of 274 degrees
 and calculate our distance
 based on a westward ground speed of 87 knots.
 That's the answer which we could get through trigonometry.
 But we really don't want to have pilots
 running trigonometry in a plane maybe at night.
 They get a call on a radio and it says,
 the wind is no longer out of 300 at 15 knots.
 It's out of 243 at 80 knots or whatever.
 And you got to recalculate where you're at
 because you're like, you know you've gone a certain distance.
 You got to recalculate where you're going to point the plane.
 All those things.
 And as interesting, as complex as the trigonometry
 is we really don't want pilots
 to be doing sign computations in the darkness.
 And they didn't have hand calculators.
 And so part of the reason that pilots
 still train on this stuff
 is that we don't want to depend too much on technology.
 I literally have on my cell phone
 an application that can tell me where the weather is,
 where I'm at, how high I am, how fast I'm going,
 all the other planes in the sky, et cetera.
 And that's great.
 But part of piloting is not depending
 on technology too much.
 You need to be able to just fly the plane
 if somehow the technology fails you.
 And so this is still taught in pilot training.
 It's still tested in your pilot exam.
 And it's an interesting thing in the notion
 that this is something that came from
 probably the 30s or the 40s.
 It's a really cool analog computer
 that we learned today as pilots.
 So let me show you how this works.
 We're going to do a simple calculation
 for airspeed correction and heading correction on an E6B.
 Our problem is a 15 knot headwind.
 So we put our little hole at 100
 and then we go up 15 knots, 110, 115,
 and put a mark right at the 15 knot mark.
 And the direction the wind is coming from
 is 300 degrees.
 We're flying 300 degrees.
 We would have a headwind of 15 knots,
 which would slow us down.
 Our plane goes 100 knots,
 so it'd be going 85 on the ground.
 But that's not where we want to go.
 We don't want to fly to 300.
 We want to fly to 270.
 Now as we're moving this,
 in a sense this analog calculator
 is doing a bunch of sines and cosines,
 Pythagorean theorem, but we don't care.
 We're just moving it.
 It is a physical thing and it is recalculated.
 So the first thing we do is we put the heading
 that we intend to fly up there at the true index.
 So we're going to fly 270 or westerly.
 Then what we've got to do is we've got to take the point,
 this point here, and we gotta move it down to 100 knots
 because that's how fast our plane is.
 And you can see that the headwind is slowing us down.
 So now we've compensated for the headwind.
 And so if you look, our plane normally goes 100 knots,
 but with this particular wind, this 15 knot wind,
 it's going to do 86, 87 knots.
 And we also have to figure out what we call the crab angle,
 which is the way we have to fly to go to the west
 to compensate for the wind.
 So we have to add four degrees,
 and that is one, two, three, four.
 So now we have, without doing any mathematics,
 nothing but manipulating a physical device,
 we have calculated the actual airspeed
 and the compensation that we need to do
 for a wind of 15 knots out of a heading of 300
 in order to maintain a heading of 270.
 The point of this is not to teach flying.
 It is the fact that a carefully engineered,
 carefully calibrated physical analog device
 can do beautiful calculations that are graphical in nature
 and frankly, very easy to use.
 Don't need a lot of training.
 You just have to know how to rotate and move and read
 using things like sliding, rotating scales, gears.
 You can even do crazy calculations
 with things like water and pulleys.
 So this kind of concludes our brief look
 at analog computing devices.
 Up next, we're going to talk about digital computing devices.
 And digital computing devices are things
 that make clicking noises.
 They're still physical devices.
 They're by definition analog, but they have two states,
 and they are stable when in each of the states,
 and we can have input to change their state.
 So a pen is kind of a classic physical digital device.
 (upbeat music)
 (upbeat music)
