 the Babbage Difference Engine was an example of mechanical iteration where you make a motor or a crank or something to do something one of the earliest most powerful mechanical computers ever built was called the Bamba and it was used to
 crack encrypted communications in World War II with Germans and Japanese that used a device called
 the Enigma to encrypt these messages and send them using Morse code and radio. And the Bomba was a
 British, Polish device that repeatedly tried to guess these settings for a day, like guessing a
 password based only on the encrypted text. And so when you listen to a Bomba moving, it is lots of
 clicking, lots of spinning and lots of rotation, because the iteration is kind of rotation.
 So we think of a for loop as iteration, but in a physical computer a for loop is often rotation.
 Another device that kind of approximates this same kind of computation with a little less high-end is
 a pinball machine. So the Bomba was a very fast electromechanical computer in the 30s and the
 40s. The pinball machine is kind of like the 50s and the 60s, and it's just, it's a kind of a good
 example of how state-of-the-art military technology becomes games later. Because a pinball machine
 uses switches and relays and physical storage, like piles of balls, to track a score, award free
 games and count the number of balls, start the game, stop the games, take your money and give
 you credits. And these are all built by using relays and wiring and knowing things like the
 response time of a relay when it's switching from sort of off to on, and then relay feedback
 that once relay goes to on it stays on. And in many ways it's a throwback to the kind of technology
 that the electromechanical computational technology similar to the Bomba. But the problem is that
 the pure mechanical computations were just too slow. And if you take a machine like the Babbage
 engine and you just make it go up 20 times faster, it's gonna fall apart in like less than a minute.
 Might take you years to build, you go too fast in it and all the pieces come flying off.
 And that's because the the energy to change the state, right, so changing state, again going back
 to this, the changing of the state is me pushing on the thumb thing. But if I all of a sudden made
 a really fast engine that would push this thing a thousand times a second, it would probably break.
 It couldn't take the stress. And so the problem is is that physical and electromechanical computing
 had just a limit of, there's like inertia, you know, physical problems like inertia.
 And so you can, you have to limit the speed of like the difference engine so you don't, or the
 Bomba, so you don't just physically damage the machine. If you go to the maximum speed and double
 it you will break the machine very, very quickly. So what happened was is instead of storing data
 and storing the zero or the one in something mechanical like a relay, they started using,
 again in World War II at Bletchley Park, electronic switching using tubes. Now tubes are interesting
 devices. They are, generally have a vacuum in them. And let me show you, let me show you this a little
 bit more close up. So here's a tube, okay, and this is a vac, this is glass. It has a vacuum in it
 and there are little plates in this tube that are heated up and glow and electrons flow between the
 plates. There's a base and an emitter and then a grid that speeds or slows up the electrons.
 And you know there's electric, electric is sent in. Sometimes it's heating, sometimes it's sort
 of just a positive or negative. Sometimes it's to control it. Now the original idea of tubes
 was to take sound waves from say a microphone and amplify them to be louder to go to a speaker.
 And so tubes are analog and continuous amplifiers, meaning whatever you put in,
 whatever signal you put in, could be a sort of a flat signal or a moving signal,
 it's going to come out louder, increased. What happens is they can do some feedback in these
 tubes and sort of tune them in such a way that you can have a certain level of voltage that is the
 zero and a certain level of voltage is the one. And then with a little feedback you can make the
 zero and the one sticky. And so it takes power and they generate heat but they have no moving
 parts so they can switch way faster than any kind of a physical storage device. So one of the first
 tube-based electronic computers was called the Colossus, also at Bletchley Park, currently at
 the National Museum of Computing History at Bletchley Park. But it could do the other
 computations way faster than the other electro-mechanical computer called the Bomba. But
 they're pretty hot. If you stand by this thing you can feel heat coming off of it.
 Power consumption and heat dissipation for tube-based computers, even though they're much faster,
 are still a challenge. This is an electronic computer, the world's first computer for many
 years because of the secrecy. It just seems that the American ENIAC computer was the world's first
 computer, very check. In fact, this computer, I was there from this colleague of mine, this computer
 predated it by three years but nobody knew that. So this man who designed and built the world's
 first electronic computer went back to Dolittle and no one ever heard of him. He carried on designing
 telephone exchange which was a real tragedy in me. Many years later, I'm really just walking by,
 very timely, and I always wanted to build one of these things. But how do you build something
 since there were no records? Well, not quite. How many flowers were put alive? He offered to help.
 There were still 89 black and white sonographs.
 Managed to find some of the engineers who were still alive. I was surprised to find so he had
 kept notebooks. That second fragment up there had been kept. So he managed to get them all together
 in a kind of a modern computer design package. They redesigned across the floor too from the
 ground up. Having redesigned it, I hope I'm not making any mistakes. Having designed across it
 from the ground up, of course they had to build it. This gentleman was clever enough. They, like with
 the telephone exchanges, were de-commissioning all their own exchanges. They took a lorry,
 went to the back door and said, "I'll get rid of all that old crap." And for free acquired the stock
 of valves. I believe they started with the metalwork and the ground up. In a mere 14 years,
 15 years of it. 16 years. 16 years I had a working machine. But to prove this is a rebuild,
 this is not a model or a simulation, you need to make it do what it was designed to do, work out
 the break to Lorenz type of machine. Now we had a General Lorenz machine. They were captured in the
 end of the war by a Gilmarchal tessering from Gilmarcher tessering. The machine was sent to
 the Heinz-Dittsdorf competing museum in Germany. It generated a test message, intercepted here,
 put on a bunch of tape, put the tape on the machine. Three and a half hours later,
 via decrypted finessus. Okay.
 Now, going back to programming, a big subplot in the Hidden Figures movie is the transition
 from doing complex calculations manually by humans in a room with adding machines to doing them
 by writing Fortran programs on IBM 7090. This was NASA. And the interesting thing is there's
 such a natural parallel to writing Fortran instructions, to following some written
 instructions by doing all the calculations. And it was very natural for these people who had
 years of experience following instructions precisely to then start writing Fortran code
 that the computer would follow. And so being a human computer was a natural training ground
 for the emerging programming field. The basic idea of this first phase is kind of fun.
 We have built endless physical devices over time to help us better understand our world.
 Things like the passage of time, things like the solar systems, stars in the night sky,
 things like how fast you can go through air, whether it's a boat or an airplane. We've always
 been interested in money. Things like curved motion under the effect of gravity spacecraft,
 like in the movie Hidden Figures. There was a lot of calculations that happened. And by the way,
 the IBM 7090 in Hidden Figures was built using transistors, solid state electronics that
 greatly reduced heat and power consumption and increased speed. And they could do basically
 24,000 multiplications per second. So in upcoming lectures, we're going to start exploring how we go
 from relays and motors to solid state computation.
