 So now we're going to bring this all together and we're going to build a simple, programmable, flexible programmable central processor, building it all with gates.
 It's not going to be very sophisticated, but it's going to be a programmable processor.
 So let's go back to the beginning of my Python class and look at this picture again,
 where we have a central processing unit that has registers and arithmetic logic units and it processes instructions.
 And in the main memory, we have the code and data.
 And so when we write a program, we kind of are putting ourselves into that main memory.
 The central processor asks, what next? And that says, give me the next instruction.
 And that next instruction is a series of binary numbers, zeros and ones, coming out of the memory of the computer.
 Then it decodes that instruction and it says, what am I going to do?
 Maybe load some, load a value from memory, store a value from memory, perform a calculation inside the central processing unit.
 And then when that's done, the central processing unit says, give me the next instruction.
 And then the main memory gives the next instruction.
 And so this is an oversimplified, generic computer, suitable for a very beginning Python programming class.
 But let's use a little more advanced terminology that you will eventually hear.
 So inside the CPU, there's a thing called the arithmetic logic unit.
 We call it the ALU. It's like the adder code.
 We've already built a three bit adder. That would be in the arithmetic logic unit.
 When they mean logic, they mean comparison, like if tests, if tests are checked, like is X less than zero?
 That's part of the logic, part of arithmetic logic.
 Registers are temporary places to store data in the CPU that does not require going to and from memory all the time.
 We've already built a register. We built a three bit latch, which I also told you was a three bit register.
 And then what we have is programs and they come from the memory.
 And so the memory has a series of program instructions. The CPU has what's called a program counter.
 And it retrieves the next instruction, decides what kind of instruction it is,
 and then sends signals to the registers and the ALU, whether it's loading data or storing data or making computations.
 Coming up very soon, we're going to actually design a simple CPU that has machine language.
 It's going to be a complete architecture. It will have a machine language and an assembly language completely defined.
 And we will write programs in this little machine language.
 Now, it's called the CDC 8512 because when I was young and just starting out,
 I programmed on a computer called the Control Data Corporation CDC 6500.
 And back when the computer museum in Seattle was open, they had a running one of these things.
 And I have a video which I will share with you.
 Unfortunately, with the passing of Paul L. and that museum closed, but that's unfortunate.
 So I've seen one running recently. I've got some video and I will share that with you.
 But that's not what we're doing right now.
 I'm just telling you that what we're doing right now is a step toward building a real live, full function CPU with machine language and data, et cetera.
 So but now we're going to build a really, really simple CPU.
 It's going to have one register. It's a three bit latch.
 It's going to have two machine instructions that we can inform the CPU what we want done.
 It has a clock that happens every second. So it runs one of two instructions every second.
 The zero instruction against machine language clears the latch and the one instruction tells the latch to add one to itself.
 And like I said, this is going to happen once per second.
 And we can submit a zero instruction or a one instruction once per second.
 So we're going to have this built and it's going to run on our emulator.
 This is the CPU. The emulator has a clock. It has a three bit latch, which is our register.
 Then it has an adder. One of the operands to the adder is the output of the latch.
 The other operand to the adder is a one, hard coded one.
 And then you take the output of the adder.
 Now, before we had run this straight into the latch so that it would just add one every time.
 But now what we have is some decoding logic.
 So if the instruction is zero, recall the latch is supposed to be set to zero.
 If the instruction is one, we're adding one to the latch.
 Every clock pulse and that clock is going up and down once per second.
 The part that we've added here from the previous example is this logic.
 When you look at real CPUs, you're going to see that they have a series of control logic.
 And what does the control logic do?
 It reads the next instruction from memory and it does what's called decoding it.
 And then it distributes signals to give orders to the rest of it.
 And so in this case, what's going to happen is this AND gate is going to block the output.
 Because we just put ANDs, we are running the one, two, and four column of the sum through the AND gate.
 And then we're hard coding zero, the instruction zero to the other inputs of the three AND gates.
 And so the output of those AND gates, if the instruction is zero, is zero.
 No matter what the other inputs are from the adder.
 So we'll start this with instruction zero.
 So every time the clock goes, the inputs to the latch are all zeros.
 Because the instruction input is a zero and zero in anything is a zero.
 So clock tick, tick, tick.
 Every time this clock is ticking, that latch is resetting, meaning copying zero from its inputs.
 So the adder is like happily adding one to the zero, but that's it.
 Because the adder inputs are being blocked from coming back into the latch by the AND gates.
 So you see when the instruction is zero, the AND gates function as a block.
 In effect, turning off the data going into the latch.
 Now we're going to switch the instruction to one and we wait one clock pulse.
 So then what happens is the one instruction going to the three AND gates is no longer blocking data.
 So whatever the outputs are coming from the adder are passing right through the gate.
 Okay, in this particular case, the adder has a four.
 That is presenting a four at the input.
 Four's column is a one and the two's column is a zero and the one's column is a zero.
 While the clock is low, that four is at the input to the register slash latch.
 And then when the clock goes high, then we'll copy the four into the latch.
 In the beginning, you start with the instruction zero, the latch is zero, the adder is one,
 but the zero instruction is blocking data to go back into the latch.
 It's blocked because it's a zero instruction.
 On the other hand, if there is a one instruction, then this functions like a counter.
 That means every second it goes up by one.
 So when the clock is high, it copies the input.
 Then the clock goes low, then the latch value goes to output, the adder adds one.
 Then as long as the instruction stays one and the clock goes high,
 the output of the adder is once again copied into the latch.
 So it's a very simple two instruction computer.
 We simply touch the instruction, we program this by touching the instruction value switch and setting it to zero or one.
 So this is a two instruction computer.
 What's missing?
 Well, really, it's really hard to build a CPU where you can reach in and touch a button
 and have the instruction be the button that you touched.
 The clock rate is, you know, megahertz, not one hertz.
 And so you can't send the instruction.
 So really what you want is a flexible way to store and retrieve instructions
 so that the instructions can be presented to the CPU fast enough to keep up with the clock rate.
 So we really want a flexible, long sequence of many instructions executed one after another,
 which we would call software or a program.
 So next, we're going to think about how we might store sequences of instruction in the memory
 and then retrieve those instructions from the memory and then execute them in the CPU.
 Wait just a second.
 There were a lot of switches on the front of a class's computer in a video from an earlier lecture.
 Yes, the earliest computers did have switches on the front to control program behavior.
 These switches often controlled conditional variables so program behavior could be changed
 while flipping a switch while the program was running.
 Actually, those switches were more like the variables that could be changed on the front panel.
