 welcome to yet another gate layout walkthrough for Computer Architecture for Everybody. In this we're
 going to play with several of the circuits, the counter and the single instruction. So if you go
 back and you take a look at the counter, I'm going to build one and then I'm going to actually load
 it. So we're just going to do a three bit adder, put the three bit adder in the middle here. And so
 the adder takes the one, two, and four, one, two, and four as A and B and then produces a sum, right?
 So if I just take an input of one, another input over here of one, and I hook the input to the one
 input, and then I hook the other one to the output, and then I change this. And so this is going to,
 if I have one plus one is two, so this is kind of a weird layout here, but this is zero plus one
 is, should be one, okay? So I had to kind of toggle that a little bit, dragging it around,
 kind of confused it. So there you go. The idea here is we're going to make a counter and we're
 going to make a counter by creating a clocked circuit. So let me delete this input, delete
 this input. So this is an adder. Whatever we present as its input, it's going to sum them
 together, zero through seven, produce the output and tell us what the output is. And then we're
 going to make a three-bit latch, and I'll take the output. The latch is like a little register,
 so that the register is, it takes its inputs, it ignores its inputs until you put a one at the
 clock. Let's go put a clock here. So when the clock is one, the inputs are being copied to the
 outputs, okay? And so let's do this. Let's make an input over here. It's kind of like a bunch of
 flip-flops output over here. So the current state of the latch, what's stored in the register is a
 value of one, and we can change this all day long and it's ignoring it. That's just like a flip-flop.
 It's just like a JK flip-flop. This is a series of JK flip-flops in here. Flip on and off. And then
 if we want to tell this register to latch in its input values, we can say do that, and then it
 latches in its input values. And then when the clock goes low again, then it copies the output
 values. So now the internal state is zero, the outputs are zero because the clock is low. So if
 I, again, now I can change this and nothing changes because it's a latch, and then I say,
 oh, let that clock go high, copies it in, then the clock goes low, and it copies it out, okay?
 So let's go ahead and build a simple counter where we're just going to take a value and store it in
 this register. Okay, so now we got the register. It's still got a one in it. So we're going to
 take this and we're going to connect the sum values to the input values of the latch. And this
 is a situation where those little waypoints can be really helpful. So I'm going to drag that one
 there, connect this one to this one, connect the two values, this second bit, then make a waypoint.
 You got to double-click to make a waypoint. So we can make a waypoint. And then connect the four
 values to the latch and double-click to make a waypoint, and pull this out to make it so that you
 can sort of see it. So all I did is I connected the corresponding outputs of the adder to the input
 of the latch. And then we're going to take the output of the latch and connect it to the input
 of the adder. Now the thing that's going to make this work so it doesn't just kind of explode and
 start on fire is this clock circuit. So I'm going to put an input on the clock circuit. I'm going to
 set that to zero. So as long as the clock circuit is zero, the current state of the latch is being
 copied to the output values. And then what I'm going to do is I'm going to make this add one
 every time. I'll just take an input and connect it to the one value of the B op-rand of the adder.
 Let's make this look prettier by putting a waypoint in. Look how pretty that is. Waypoint, nice.
 Let's put a waypoint here while we're at it to make it pretty. Look at that. Oh,
 it's a pretty little clock. So now this is a zero, but I want to turn this to a one.
 And so what happens now is we are being presented with a one on the A inputs, the number one,
 one, zero, zero, and a one on the B inputs. So the adder is continuously computing. So think of this
 as three full adders. It's continuously computing. And it's continuously presenting this two,
 which is zero, one, zero. It's presenting two at the inputs of the latch. But because the latch
 currently has a clock of zero, we are not copying it. So what'll happen here is hit the clock goes
 to one, we will see that the two is copied from the adder to the latch, but the two is not copied
 to the outputs of the latch and therefore to the inputs of the adder until the clock goes low again.
 So now the clock went low. So now the two is being presented on the inputs to the adder
 and the plus one. And so we get three. So if I could just start clicking this clock off and on,
 and remember it, when it goes to one, it copies from the adder to the latch. When it goes to zero,
 it copies from the latch back to the adder. Otherwise it would just go, and the timing would
 be very, very weird at that point. So this is a clock circuit and these registers inside CPUs
 tend to be clocked. And so we'll do this, but let's just add a clock to it so that we don't have to
 keep clicking. So let's take a look at this clock component and hook up an output to it.
 And so the clock, come on, hook up a happy little output. There we go. Okay. So the clock is
 currently off and it's producing a one. So I'm going to click on the clock to turn it on. So now
 it's giving high, low. And you'll see that every second the clock is going from high to low to high
 to low to high to low. And so what I'm going to do is I'm going to delete this little manual clock
 that I put in, goodbye, and delete this little output, goodbye, and I'm going to connect the high
 value to the clock value on the latch. And let's go ahead and put a little waypoint in here to make
 it a little prettier. You can drag these waypoints quite nicely. If anybody wants to grab the source
 to this and give me a better routing algorithm, I would greatly appreciate it. So now what we're
 seeing here is this clock is going high to low. Here, let's go ahead and put a little output here
 so we can watch what's going on a little better. Connect the high to the output. So you can see
 the clock is going from zero to one to zero to one. And every time it goes to one, it copies into
 the latch. And then every time it goes to zero, it copies from the latch to the adder and ignores.
 The thing that makes this work is like the six is being ignored until the clock goes high. So we now
 have a little counter that's counting up to seven and then resetting itself. You see it kind of says
 overflow? That's because when you add seven plus one, it's zero overflow. That's when you carry out
 of the top full adder. Okay, so we just made a simple counter that goes from zero through seven
 and counts up seconds. And so you could think of this as like a little clock. I think I might be
 able to put for fun a little Nixie. Let's see if I can make a Nixie work here. So here's a Nixie tube
 and I think that I can copy this. This is going to look ugly. I'll just kind of copy them here.
 Let's copy the Nixie there. Copy. It's still running.
 I'm just taking the one, two, and the four values and copying them from the sum output.
 There we go. Now all we did is, come on Nixie, move. Okay, so the Nixie is just
 keeping track of what's going here. We could actually put a Nixie in between here.
 So you could see if the Nixie outputs seven and seven, the adder tells us what its current output
 value is and the latch tells us. But you can actually take the Nixie and use it to copy things.
 But it's pretty and it's really pretty darn awesome. So that was a counter example. So I
 hope you found this walkthrough useful and I hope that you can construct your own counter. Now I'll
 just say I got a cheat code in here. Okay, so if you really want to, you can just load a counter.
 I stored a counter inside of it and so there goes a counter. The clock's off. It's got everything we
 just said. It's got all the stuff connected. It's a little prettier than the one I just drew. But I'll
 turn it on and it's starting. It's just counting every second, right? And the actual data here is
 the data in the latch and that would be the thing that you would be just seeing if you were building
 like a digital wristwatch or something like that. Okay, so again, thanks for listening. I hope you
 found this walkthrough useful.
