 - Hello and welcome through another walkthrough for computer architecture for everybody.
 In this walkthrough, I am going to walk through the building
 of a slightly more complex circuit.
 In this case, we are going to build a NAND gate.
 So NAND of course is the opposite of AND.
 So if both inputs are one, the output is zero.
 And if any of the outputs are zero, the output is one.
 It's the opposite of AND.
 And so let's take a look at the picture.
 So the way this works is there are two inputs
 and there is a set of PMOS transistors at the top,
 kind of in parallel going from the positive voltage
 to a common wire in the middle to out.
 And then there is a set of NMOS transistors in series
 between the out and the ground.
 'Cause this is CMOS circuitry.
 The goal is to either have VDD come out or ground to come out,
 depending on A and B in the combination,
 based on the truth table.
 So let's go ahead and draw this.
 So I'm gonna draw this in a little more traditional way
 than I did in my previous demonstration.
 It's pretty common to just draw a line across the top
 and put the VCC across the top.
 So you see that we're sort of emulating
 a lot of what these diagrams look like.
 And then what I wanna do is I wanna create
 two P transistors, so the A and the B.
 And so I'm gonna drop a little bit of P-dope silicon down.
 I'm gonna give myself plenty of space
 and make these plenty long.
 Okay.
 And then I'm gonna make some transistors there
 by putting some poly across.
 I'm gonna put it like,
 I'm gonna keep this really tiny for now, okay?
 So there's some poly.
 So there's two transistors.
 So we just made, by crossing the P-dope silicon
 and the poly silicon twice,
 we now have transistors that we can hook A and B up to.
 We'll wire them up later.
 And then what we're gonna do is we're gonna make the output.
 I'll just make the output be a horizontal piece
 of metal wire.
 Now I've gotta put some vias in here
 so I can connect the P-dope silicon to the metal
 where I need to.
 So let's punch a couple of vias in.
 Via, via, via, via.
 So now the orange P-dope silicon
 and the metals are connected.
 Okay.
 So the next thing we need to do
 is we need to make some NMOS transistors down at the bottom.
 So let's grab some N-dope silicon
 and hook this up here.
 And then, oops, I need to fix that.
 I need to erase that.
 I need to give myself a little space here.
 So I wanna make some N-dope silicon
 that kind of comes down from the center wire a little bit.
 And then I am going to make some more N-dope silicon.
 Actually, I don't know if I need to do that.
 Let's try to make it in one big piece of N-dope silicon.
 Let me make my N-dope silicon longer.
 And now let's put some polysilicon in
 to make two more transistors.
 So we're gonna put transistor here
 and then another transistor here.
 So that's two transistors,
 two NMOS transistors that are right there.
 And I think I might as well put my ground in now.
 The ground down here.
 Traditionally, you sort of draw that
 as a long horizontal line.
 I will place some zero or ground voltage
 and then I'll place a couple of vias
 to make sure to connect the green N-dope silicon
 to the metal in both of the places.
 So I think we mostly have this,
 except now we've gotta take our inputs
 and connect them to those transistors.
 So let's make an A input for now.
 Let's make a little bit of metal.
 This shouldn't be too hard.
 So let's just say this is our A input
 and then we're gonna hook that to here.
 I wanna make that a little longer.
 So I'm gonna make my pink a little bit longer.
 I'm gonna put A on this one,
 which is a little bit different.
 So here's the thing.
 I can paint this pink, so now I have an overlap.
 See how I painted that pink
 so it overlaps with the metal now?
 So I can pop a via in there, punch, punch.
 So that is my A.
 Let's go ahead and mark that with a probe.
 Let's mark that as A.
 Okay, and now we've gotta have B.
 B is a little bit trickier.
 Where am I gonna, well, let's start with B, E.
 Let's put B in easy.
 Let's make B, B here.
 Okay, so then let's put the contact of B,
 the probe B right there.
 So now I have B.
 Now the key thing is I've got to get this B
 up to this second PMOS gate.
 So I could do a lot of things here.
 I could route it up here, and I'll route it over there.
 Or I could route it over here,
 and then route it down to here.
 So I think I'm gonna come through here.
 So you're gonna see something.
 I'm gonna take this polysilicon.
 And in a real circuit, you might find that this is kinda,
 oh, look what I can do.
 Because when I make this polysilicon
 come across the metal right there,
 it's not actually connected.
 And then look, ooh, no, ooh, yikes.
 I gotta erase it 'cause I made a kind of a blob.
 I spilled some, I spilled some polysilicon.
 So now I can actually connect this together.
 Wow, I think that looks pretty easy at this point.
 Did it work?
 So I have my A connected to one of the PMOS transistors
 and one of the NMOS transistors.
 And then I have my B connected to one
 of the NMOS transistors and one of the PMOS transistors.
 I have a feeling that it is right.
 And I think if we look at our assignment,
 we're supposed to make a Q as the output.
 So let's put another probe here on the output, Q.
 So I could run the autograder.
 I think I got it.
 I think I made one.
 It's pretty good here.
 But one of the things I do to test these things is,
 oh, I didn't mean to put that via there.
 Put a VCC there.
 So now I can see that I put a plus in the A area
 and it stops the PMOS, but it does transmit.
 But then I have to put, like, let's put a VCC
 where the B is now.
 Oh, I'm missing a via.
 See how the voltage comes here from the one
 and it hits this overlap?
 I gotta put a via there because it doesn't really touch.
 Boop.
 So now I think we got it.
 A is one and B is one and the output is zero,
 which is good.
 So we can keep testing it.
 I just tested by popping a ground in here.
 So now we have A is zero and B is one
 and the output is one, which is what it's supposed to be
 because it's a NAND gate.
 So I'm gonna go back to putting the probes in.
 So you notice how I can just kind of overwrite this stuff.
 So there's A and I got the probe B now.
 Now I can actually start the grader.
 I think it'll go through all the combinations
 in the truth table and it will tell us
 if it likes the circuit that we built.
 So let's go ahead.
 Check for the A, B and Q probes.
 They seem to be there.
 Test, let's set A to zero and B to zero.
 And is the output one?
 A is zero, B is zero, output's one.
 Yes it is.
 Set A to zero and B to one.
 Is the output zero?
 Oh no, the output's supposed to be one in that case.
 Yep.
 So this is a, and then if we do A to one and B to zero,
 the output is one.
 And then if we set them both to one, the output is zero,
 which it's a NAND gate.
 And so we finished and away we go.
 So there we did, we took and viewed this image
 and made ourselves the gate by laying it out.
 And again, I tend to start by laying transistors out,
 but you gotta give yourself a little space
 as you lay these things out and put them together.
 Now I've built them a few times.
 The first few that you're gonna build
 are going to be a little tricky,
 but it's very satisfying when you get them finished.
 So I hope you enjoyed this walkthrough
 for computer architecture on the building of a gate
 using a VLSI design tool.
 (upbeat music)
 [BLANK_AUDIO]
