 Hello and welcome to our lecture on the CDC 6504 architecture. So as you'll soon see, this is a
 blend of two names so that I can avoid confusion with the actual processor that you're simulating.
 So the processor that we're simulating is the MOS Technology 6502. There are many microprocessors
 that have deep historical significance. The 6502 is a very significant processor in terms of the
 history of CPU architecture and its evolution. It was launched in 1975 and the key to it was low
 cost of manufacture. It was simple. It only had four thousand transistors. Remember the Intel 4004
 had two thousand three hundred transistors. This ran into megahertz and they kept the price low at
 twenty five dollars. So it just allowed a whole series of hobbyist computers like the Apple One.
 That was a hobbyist computer. And so it sort of just opened up a whole bunch of things.
 And so the problem is, is that if I name my emulator the 6502 emulator, it would get lost
 in all of the confusion. So I changed it to the CDC 6504 to pay homage to the first computer that
 I ever used in the 1970s from Control Data Corporation. I learned Fortran on it. I learned
 assembly language on it. I learned machine language on it. And I have a picture here
 of a running version of this computer at the Living Computer Museum in Seattle,
 Washington that sadly is now closed after Paul Allen passed away. But I have a video that I
 will share with you that is a video of a running CDC 6500 from a couple of years ago. I further was
 lucky to meet an important influencer in the CDC 6500 history, Nicholas Werth, and he invented
 Pascal. I used Pascal. I supported the Pascal compiler. It was a really important part of my
 own sort of education was to build compilers. And so I'm going to show you an artifact from
 that time period. So this is from-- I don't know if you can see it. Let's see if you can see it
 here. This is from-- yeah, there you go-- 1980. This was a one-year project in computer science
 where I-- this is assembly language from the CDC 6500. This is a compiler and an optimizer,
 and so it was written in Fortran. These are line printers. Let's see if I can find something
 interesting to show you with all kinds of documentation. And so we wrote all this stuff
 in 1979 and 1980. It was a two-student project, and I have kept it for all this time.
 There we go. So that's an artifact from the CDC 6500. And again, I named the CDC 6504
 just so I had something to search on. So this is the architecture of the CDC 6504.
 And the first thing you have to understand is the registers. And when you start using this
 interactively online, you'll be reading these registers. So the most important register, the
 what next register, is the program counter, also known as the PC. As we've seen in some earlier
 lectures, there's the current instruction register, which is important. And it often is not shown on
 architecture diagrams, even though it's very important. The accumulator. So the CDC 6504 and
 the 6502 is an accumulator-based system. And that's sort of like the most power. They have one single
 most powerful register, and that is the accumulator. As you do operations, they set flags after every
 operation so that you can do if tests. So was the last result zero? Was the last result negative?
 It has two more registers that are a little less powerful than the accumulator called the X and Y
 registers. And on the emulator itself that I've built, it shows the instructions in base two,
 which makes it easier to decode. And the data memory will be shown in hex, given that most of
 the time we're just going to be putting characters into the data memory. So we program the CDC 6504
 in machine language. And so there's some really good documentation that is that I built with the
 help of AI. So this is a similar language for the clear instruction, clear X, increment X,
 et cetera, et cetera. So we'll cover these in much more detail. So let's start right away
 with our first program. So you can kind of go back. So our program is going to compute one plus one
 equals two in the X register. So the PC tells the system where to retrieve the next instruction from.
 So when the program, when the computer starts, before we start it running,
 the PC starts at zero. And so the first instruction is one, one, one, zero, zero, one, zero,
 which is clearing the X register. Now the system starts at zeros in there, but it's probably smart
 just to clear it anywhere, anyway. Then it has two increment instructions, and then it has an all
 zeros instruction, which says stop. Okay. So let's walk this through. So when the first execution of
 the first instruction is done, well, that sets the X register to zero. But then the side effect of
 that is to increment the PC register to one and then run that instruction. And so when that
 instruction runs, we increment X. And so you can see that X is now incremented to one. But then once
 that instruction is run, then it moves to the O2 instruction. And that is also an increment,
 which it reads, and then it increments X to two. And then it runs to the last instruction, which is
 a break. And then that stops our program. So it runs, runs three instructions, and then stops.
 So at this point, you might say to yourself, "Oh, wait a second. This seems familiar."
 Clearing a register and incrementing a register, and then stopping, that's something we've done
 before. Literally, in previous lectures, you have built a two instruction computer with a latch,
 and an adder, and a clock. And so you can say, "Oh, well, what is this?" Well, the register is
 like the latch. The adder is the thing that does the increment for us, because the latch's output
 goes into the adder, and we've hard-coded a one to the other input of the adder. And then we have a
 clock that decides when things are going to run. And then we have an instruction, which is either
 zero or one. This is a one-bit computer, right? And the thing that I complained about several times
 in previous lectures is that it's not reading instructions from memory. What we just got done
 doing is reading instructions from memory. And then there's the decode logic, which is always
 a difficult thing for students to understand, where it is looking at literally the bits of
 the instruction and using AND gates and OR gates, actually enabling or disabling parts of the
 processor. So the increment instruction, or the loading into the latch based on the clock,
 is turned off based on the instruction. So the decoding, and if you look at the decoding of a
 typical microprocessor, it's like a whole city block, right? And so the instructions in a real
 computer sitting in memory, the decoding has to look at all eight of those bits in our 6502,
 and it has to send all those bits to various places to turn on and off elements of the registers
 and elements of the arithmetic logic unit. And so we had it, this is eight-bit instructions,
 which means we have a whole bunch of things that we can do and control. Now,
 if you think about it, at this point, if you had enough time,
 you could build a CDC 6504 and manufacturing capability. Because if you go to that simple CPU
 and that simple CPU, the latch, the adder, and the clock can be mapped to transistors,
 because underneath them they're transistors, and we covered that. And then we showed you how to make
 VLSI logic design, where you can lay out in a two-dimensional grid different materials that
 cause transistors, right? And then all you would need is a billion dollar personal manufacturing
 facility to turn those transistor layouts into chips. And then you could cut those chips up,
 and then you could manufacture a 6502. Now, the goal of this course is not for you to go
 and build a two billion dollar microprocessor fabrication facility, but to understand that
 really you know the essence of the entire process to build a complex CPU and produce it. It's
 possible, and you understand the basics of it. So up next we're just going to start going into
 more detail of the entire machine language.
