 Hello, and welcome to another walkthrough for Computer Architecture for Everybody. We're continuing on our
 CDC 6504 emulator, and now we're going to load our most complex sample. So let's take a look at its assembly language.
 Here we have it, and let's move it over here, and let's move it up so we see all of the instructions. There we go.
 We can just barely see all the instructions. This is our first thing.
 That's so long that we're going to end up in the second column of the instructions. So to start at what we've got here,
 we got a data pseudo operation that fills the data memory with the string "hello"
 H-E-L-L-O with H being uppercase already and E-L-L-O. When we're done,
 we want all these characters to be uppercase, and so we're going to write a loop that's going to go through
 from 0 until it's, and it's going to stop at a 0 byte, and it's going to load the value, check if it's already uppercase.
 If it's not, it's going to subtract 20 to it, which we did before because that's the mapping between uppercase and lowercase,
 and then we're going to store it back in. So when we're done, 48 won't change because that's already uppercase.
 65 will become 45, 6C will become 4C, etc., and then it'll stop and it'll print out the uppercase.
 So this is just kind of like an uppercase method in Python or whatever, okay?
 So let's take a look at the code. We have a top of a loop, and we have a jump to the top of the loop at the bottom.
 We're using X as our iteration variable, X, because we have this really cool load that says I want to load from 0,
 offset by the current value in X.
 Okay, so X is going to start at 0 because we're going to clear it, and then we're going to slowly but surely add X.
 So this is like X equals X plus 1 each time through the loop.
 So this is the bottom of the loop, kind of the continue area, where we're saying X plus plus or X equals X plus 1 to
 advance X through the string because we're going to use X as the array offset as it's going through our little array.
 We're going to load the value, offset by X, and then we're going to immediately check to see if we got a 0 byte,
 and that's how we terminate this loop when we hit a 0 byte.
 So we only want to go through memory until we hit a 0 byte, okay?
 So we don't want to run out of memory or blow up or run into something else.
 We stop at a 0 byte, and then we're going to check to see if the letter we just got is already uppercase.
 If it is, that means it's less than lowercase a. That's how ASCII works, right?
 So let me go ahead and show you the ASCII stuff.
 [silence]
 The lowercase characters are higher by a factor of 20 hex, so a, lowercase a is 61, and uppercase a is 41.
 You subtract 0 X 20 to get from lowercase to upper, and our code is going to upper.
 So we're checking to see if we are above or below lowercase a, if we're below lowercase a already,
 we're going to do a branch minus down here and then increment to go to the next one.
 If, on the other hand, we are above the letter a, then we're going to subtract 20,
 and then we're going to store that using our index again as X.
 So X is really cool. It's just going to be our counter.
 And so this register is kind of like the iteration variable. Well, it is the iteration variable of our loop.
 So let's go ahead and get started. So I'll turn on narration of execution, line ourselves up here,
 take our first step, clear the X register.
 PC 0X 00, clear X register.
 So now we're at the top of the loop, and we're going to do a load from memory location 0, offset by X register.
 The X register is actually part of this instruction, okay? So let's go ahead and load that.
 PC 0X 01, load accumulator from address 0 and X with X.
 Okay, so now you see that the accumulator is 0X 48, and that is the uppercase hello.
 And that load set the Z flag and the N flag, and it's neither 0 nor negative.
 And so let's go ahead and run the if test to see if we're done with the loop.
 PC 0X 03, branch if equal address 0X 10.
 Now 0X 10 would have been this exit of the loop, but it didn't because we're not minus yet.
 And so that's our top tested loop, and now what we're going to do is we're going to say if this is greater than A,
 if it's less than A, we're going to skip these next two lines, and the next two lines are a subtract of 0X 20,
 and then an index store into memory location 0 offset by X, but X is still position 0.
 So this is the letter H, and it is already uppercase, so we're going to skip around this subtraction calculation.
 PC 0X 05, compare accumulator with immediate 0X 61.
 And now we're going to branch because it is N, so we're going to branch if minus, and that means we're already uppercase.
 PC 0X 07, branch if minus address 0X 0D.
 So it went to 0X 0D, which skipped around the subtraction, and now we're at the kind of continue or the loop bottom,
 in the increment part of the loop, and we're going to add 1 to X.
 PC 0X 0D, increment X register PC 0X 0E, jump to address 1.
 Oh, it went and did it automatically. So we went up to the top of the loop, and I didn't catch it fast enough,
 so it already went, and X is now 1, so it's loading memory location 1 into the accumulator.
 Okay, and so the accumulator now is non-zero, so we're going to check to see if the loop is done.
 PC 0X 03, branch if equal address 0X 10.
 And it didn't, so now we're going to check to see the case of our current character.
 PC 0X 05, compare accumulator with immediate 0X 61.
 So that is checking to see if it's above or below A, and this one is above A,
 and so we're going to have to map it into uppercase, so you'll notice that this BMI does not jump to the CONT label.
 This one falls through.
 PC 0X 07, branch if minus address 0X 0D.
 So now we're at 0X 09, not 0X 0D, and now we're going to do the subtract of 20,
 and then we're going to store it into the memory.
 PC 0X 09, subtract with carry immediate 0X 20.
 And now we're going to store it.
 PC 0X 0B, store accumulator to address 0 and X with X.
 So now in location 1, we took this 45 that was our calculated uppercase character,
 and now it has been stored in position 1.
 And so the next thing we do is add 1 and then jump to the top of the loop.
 PC 0X 0D, increment X register.
 PC 0X 0E, jump to address 1.
 So now we're at the top of the loop.
 We're going to grab the next character, because X is now 2,
 so we're going to grab the 2 offset from our array.
 PC 0X 01, load accumulator from address 0 and X with X.
 So we got 60, so I'm going to just run this a bit, okay?
 And I'll try to stop it so that I can show you kind of the last iteration of the loop.
 So we'll watch X.
 I'll probably try to catch it while X sub, the fourth iteration,
 the, well, the fifth iteration, but sub 4 is running.
 Let's see if I can start it and then catch it.
 PC 0X 03, branch of equal address 0X 10.
 PC 0X 05, compare accumulator with immediate 0X 61.
 PC 0X 07, branch of minus address 0X 0D.
 We're on a series of things that have to be converted to uppercase now.
 PC 0X 0B, store accumulator to address 0 and X with X.
 PC 0X 0D, increment X register.
 PC 0X 0E, jump to address 1.
 PC 0X 01, load accumulator from address 0
 and X with X.
 PC 0X 03, branch of equal address 0X 10.
 PC 0X 05, compare accumulator with immediate 0X 61.
 PC 0X 07, branch of minus address 0X 0D.
 PC 0X 09, subtract with carry immediate 0X 20.
 PC 0X 0B, store accumulator to address 0
 and X with X.
 PC 0X 0D, increment X register.
 PC 0X 0E, jump to address 1.
 PC 0X 01, load accumulator from address 0
 and X with X.
 PC 0X 03, branch of equal address 0X 10.
 PC 0X 05, compare accumulator with immediate 0X 61.
 PC 0X 07, branch of minus address 0X 0D.
 PC 0X 0--
 OK, so I kind of stopped it.
 So where are we at here?
 We're about to store this last character.
 We got it subtracted, so it's now uppercase.
 And we're about to store it into position offset by X.
 Our iteration variable is 4.
 PC 0X 0B, store accumulator to address 0 and X with X.
 The next thing we're going to do is increment X.
 So X is going to become 5.
 PC 0X 0D, increment X register.
 And now we're going to jump to the top of the loop.
 PC 0X 0E, jump to address 1.
 So now we're at the top of the loop.
 So X is 5.
 And we're going to load the character at offset 5.
 And so now you'll notice, as soon as we do this,
 accumulator is going to be 0 and the Z flag is going to be set.
 PC 0X 01, load accumulator from address 0 and X with X.
 So see, you got accumulator of 0 and we got Z.
 So now we are going to do a BEQ to done.
 So we're going to jump right out of this loop
 because now we've hit the 0 byte in our character array.
 PC 0X 03, branch if equal address 0X 1 0.
 One more.
 PC 0X 1 0, break printed output, hello.
 So it finished.
 It finished.
 And look, it printed out an uppercase version
 of the word hello.
 So I recommend that you go in and you play with this
 and you load this and you control the reset, the narrate,
 the stepping.
 You kind of see how I'm doing it.
 I'll tell you, I know what I'm doing
 and it's really hard to read these things.
 And that's why I kind of think of this
 from an assembly language perspective.
 I'm trying to figure out.
 It doesn't hurt to sort of hover over and say,
 oh, that's the compare instruction
 and that is the letter A.
 And you can hover over these things
 and learn some stuff about what each of the locations is.
 So this is a nice little bit of code
 that is a loop with an F test.
 It's got increments.
 It's got a continue in it.
 And so it is kind of a nontrivial piece of code,
 the smallest nontrivial piece of code
 that I could fit into this particular emulator on a screen
 that's small enough that maybe that you can see this
 on a mobile device.
 So I hope you found this useful.
 Cheers.
 (upbeat music)
